<h1>D3D12 Indirect Drawing</h1>

---

<h1>Contents</h1>

- [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Detailed Design](#detailed-design)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Indirect Argument Buffer Structures](#indirect-argument-buffer-structures)
- [Command signature Creation](#command-signature-creation)
  - [Incrementing constant](#incrementing-constant)
  - [Example Command signatures](#example-command-signatures)
    - [Plain MultiDrawIndirect](#plain-multidrawindirect)
    - [Root Constants + Vertex Buffers](#root-constants--vertex-buffers)
  - [Validation](#validation)
- [Drawing](#drawing)
- [Bundles](#bundles)
- [State leakage](#state-leakage)
- [Obtaining buffer virtual addresses](#obtaining-buffer-virtual-addresses)
- [Feature tiers](#feature-tiers)
- [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
- [GPU Validation](#gpu-validation)
- [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Runtime Functional Tests](#runtime-functional-tests)
  - [Driver Conformance Tests](#driver-conformance-tests)
- [Change log](#change-log)

---

# Summary

This document describes D3D12 features needed to allow applications to
generate command buffers on the GPU.

## Motivation

Some game developers see significant performance advantages by moving
scene-traversal and culling onto the GPU. This is hard to do with the
D3D API because D3D requires command buffers to be generated by the CPU.
This proposal contains additions to D3D12 which would allow a limited
degree of GPU-based command buffer generation.

---

# Detailed Design

---

## Overview

A new API object is added to D3D12, the command signature. This object
enables applications to specify:

- The indirect argument buffer format

- The command type that will be used (DrawInstanced,
    DrawIndexedInstanced, Dispatch)

- The set of resource bindings which will change per-command call
    versus the set which will be inherited

At startup, an application would create a small set of command
signatures. At runtime, the application would fill a buffer with
commands (via whatever means that application chooses). The application
would then use D3D12 command list APIs to set state (render target
bindings, PSO, etc), and then use a command list API to cause the GPU to
interpret the contents of the indirect argument buffer according to the
format defined by a particular command signature.

For example, suppose an application wants a unique root constant to be
specified per-draw call in the indirect argument buffer. The application
would create a command signature that enables the indirect argument
buffer to specify the following parameters per draw call:

- Draw arguments (Vertex Count, Instance Count, ...)

- The value of 1 root constant

The indirect argument buffer generated by the application would contain
an array of fixed-size records. Each structure corresponds to 1 draw
call. Each structure contains the drawing arguments, and the value of
the root constant. The number of draw calls is specified in a separate
GPU-visible buffer.

An example command buffer generated by the application would look like:

|**Command Buffer Format**| |
|-|-|
|`RootConstant (RootParameterIndex=1)`|   Draw structure \#1|
|`VertexCount`||
|`InstanceCount`||
|`StartVertexLocation`||
|`StartInstanceLocation`||
|`RootConstant (RootParameterIndex=1)`|   Draw structure \#2
|`VertexCount`||
|`InstanceCount`||
|`StartVertexLocation`||
|`StartInstanceLocation`||
|`RootConstant (RootParameterIndex=1)`|   Draw structure \#3
|`VertexCount`||
|`InstanceCount`||
|`StartVertexLocation`||
|`StartInstanceLocation`||

---

## Indirect Argument Buffer Structures

The following structures define how particular arguments appear in an
indirect argument buffer. These structures do not appear in any D3D12
API. Applications use these definitions when writing to an indirect
argument buffer (with the CPU or GPU)

```C++
typedef struct D3D12_DRAW_ARGUMENTS
{
    UINT VertexCountPerInstance;
    UINT InstanceCount;
    UINT StartVertexLocation;
    UINT StartInstanceLocation;
} D3D12_DRAW_ARGUMENTS;

typedef struct D3D12_DRAW_INDEXED_ARGUMENTS
{
    UINT IndexCountPerInstance;
    UINT InstanceCount;
    UINT StartIndexLocation;
    INT BaseVertexLocation;
    UINT StartInstanceLocation;
} D3D12_DRAW_INDEXED_ARGUMENTS;

typedef struct D3D12_DISPATCH_ARGUMENTS
{
    UINT ThreadGroupCountX;
    UINT ThreadGroupCountY;
    UINT ThreadGroupCountZ;
} D3D12_DISPATCH_ARGUMENTS;

typedef struct D3D12_DISPATCH_MESH_ARGUMENTS
{
    UINT ThreadGroupCountX;
    UINT ThreadGroupCountY;
    UINT ThreadGroupCountZ;
} D3D12_DISPATCH_MESH_ARGUMENTS;

typedef struct D3D12_VERTEX_BUFFER_VIEW
{
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS BufferLocation;
    UINT SizeInBytes;
    UINT StrideInBytes;
} D3D12_VERTEX_BUFFER_VIEW;

typedef struct D3D12_INDEX_BUFFER_VIEW
{
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS BufferLocation;
    UINT SizeInBytes;
    DXGI_FORMAT Format;
} D3D12_INDEX_BUFFER_VIEW;

typedef struct D3D12_DISPATCH_RAYS_DESC
{
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS_RANGE RayGenerationShaderRecord;
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS_RANGE_AND_STRIDE MissShaderTable;
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS_RANGE_AND_STRIDE HitGroupTable;
    D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS_RANGE_AND_STRIDE CallableShaderTable;
    UINT Width;
    UINT Height;
    UINT Depth;
} D3D12_DISPATCH_RAYS_DESC;
```

---

# Command signature Creation

Applications use the following API to create a command signature.

```C++
typedef enum D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE
{
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INDEXED,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DISPATCH,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_VERTEX_BUFFER_VIEW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INDEX_BUFFER_VIEW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_CONSTANT,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_CONSTANT_BUFFER_VIEW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_SHADER_RESOURCE_VIEW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_UNORDERED_ACCESS_VIEW,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DISPATCH_RAYS,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DISPATCH_MESH,
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INCREMENTING_CONSTANT
} D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE;

typedef struct D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_DESC
{
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE Type;
    union
    {
        struct
        {
            UINT Slot;
        } VertexBuffer;

        struct
        {
            UINT RootParameterIndex;
            UINT DestOffsetIn32BitValues;
            UINT Num32BitValuesToSet;
        } Constant;

        struct
        {
            UINT RootParameterIndex;
        } ConstantBufferView;

        struct
        {
            UINT RootParameterIndex;
        } ShaderResourceView;

        struct
        {
            UINT RootParameterIndex;
        } UnorderedAccessView;

        // Tier 1.1 support
        struct
        {
            UINT RootParameterIndex;
            UINT DestOffsetIn32BitValues;
        } IncrementingConstant;
    };
} D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_DESC;

typedef struct D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE_DESC
{
    // The number of bytes between each drawing structure
    UINT ByteStride; 
    UINT NumArgumentDescs;
    [annotation("_Field_size_full_(NumArgumentDescs)")] const D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_DESC* pArgumentDescs;
    UINT NodeMask;
} D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE_DESC;

HRESULT ID3D12Device::CreateCommandSignature(
    const D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE* pDesc,
    ID3D12RootSignature* pRootSignature,
    REFIID riid, // Expected: ID3D12CommandSignature
    void** ppCommandSignature
);
```

The ordering of arguments within an indirect argument buffer is defined
to exactly match the order of arguments specified in
D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE::pArgumentDescs. All of the arguments for 1
draw/dispatch call within an indirect argument buffer are tightly
packed. However, applications are allowed to specify an arbitrary byte
stride between draw/dispatch commands in an indirect argument buffer.

`D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INCREMENTING_CONSTANT` is a unique argument type in that it doesn't occupy any argument buffer space. See [Incrementing constant](#incrementing-constant).

The root signature must be specified if and only if the command
signature changes one of the root arguments.

For root SRV/UAV/CBV, the application specified size in in bytes. The
debug layer will validate the following restrictions on the sizes and
address:

1. CBV -- Address and size must be a multiple of 256 bytes

2. Raw UAV -- Address and size must be a multiple of 4 bytes

3. Typed UAV -- Address and size must be a multiple of the UAV format
    size

4. Structured UAV -- Address and size must be a multiple of the
    structure byte stride (declared in the shader)

5. SRV - Address and size must be a multiple of the SRV format size

A given command signature is either a draw or a compute command
signature. If a command signature contains a drawing operation, then it
is a graphics command signature. Otherwise, the command signature must
contain a dispatch operation, and it is a compute command signature.

Graphics command signatures only affect graphics root arguments.
Likewise, compute command signatures only affect compute root arguments.

---

## Incrementing constant

[Feature tier](#feature-tiers) 1.1 adds support for `D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INCREMENTING_CONSTANT`.

This is a unique argument type in that it doesn't occupy any argument buffer space.

Instead, `D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INCREMENTING_CONSTANT` makes the system update a specified root constant for each executed command.  The configuration of the update is in the `IncrementingConstant` union entry of `D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_DESC` (see [Command signature creation](#command-signature-creation)):

```C++
struct
{
    UINT RootParameterIndex; // Must match with a root constant in the command signature's root signature
    UINT DestOffsetIn32BitValues; // Which constant in case the root constant has multiple 
} IncrementingConstant;
```

From the shader point of view, accessing this is simply a matter of accessing the corresponding root constant.

The counter is a 32-bit UINT. For a given `ExecuteIndirect` call, the value starts at `0` for the first command and increments by `1` for each subsequent command.

A command signature can contain at most one incrementing constant.

After an `ExecuteIndirect()` invocation completes, any root constant targeted by an incrementing constant argument is reset to `0`, consistent with the overall rules defined in [State leakage](#state-leakage).  As stated in that section, runtime accomplishes this by calling the driver to set the root constant to `0`.

---

## Example Command signatures

---

### Plain MultiDrawIndirect

In this example, the indirect argument buffer generated by the
application holds an array of 36-byte structures. Each structure only
contains the 5 parameters passed to DrawIndexedInstanced (plus padding).

The code to create the command signature description is:

```C++
D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE Args[1];
Args[0].Type = D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INDEXED_INSTANCED;

D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE ProgramDesc;
ProgramDesc.ByteStride = 36;
ProgramDesc.ArgumentCount = 1;
ProgramDesc.pArgumentDescs = Args;
```

The layout of a single structure within an indirect argument buffer is:

| | |
-|-
Bytes 0:3|     `IndexCountPerInstance`
Bytes 4:7|     `InstanceCount`
Bytes 8:11|    `StartIndexLocation`
Bytes 12:15|   `BaseVertexLocation`
Bytes 16:19|   `StartInstanceLocation`
Bytes 20:35|   `Padding`

---

### Root Constants + Vertex Buffers

In this example, each structure in an indirect argument buffer changes 2
root constants, changes 1 vertex buffer binding, and performs 1 drawing
non-indexed operation. There is no padding between structures.

The code to create the command signature description is:

```C++
D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE Args[4];
Args[0].Type = D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_CONSTANT;
Args[0].Constant.RootParameterIndex = 2;
Args[1].Type = D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_CONSTANT;
Args[1].Constant.RootParameterIndex = 6;
Args[2].Type = D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_VERTEX_BUFFER;
Args[2].VertexBuffer.VBSlot = 3;
Args[3].Type = D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INSTANCED;

D3D12_COMMAND_SIGNATURE ProgramDesc;
ProgramDesc.ByteStride = 40;
ProgramDesc.ArgumentCount = 4;
ProgramDesc.pArgumentDescs = Args;
```

The layout of a single structure within the indirect argument buffer is:

| | |
-|-
Bytes 0:3|Data for root parameter index 2
Bytes 4:7|Data for root parameter index 6
Bytes 8:15|Virtual address of VB (64-bit)
Bytes 16:19|VB stride
Bytes 20:23|VB size
Bytes 24:27|VertexCountPerInstance
Bytes 28:31|InstanceCount
Bytes 32:35|StartVertexLocation
Bytes 36:39|StartInstanceLocation

---

## Validation

The runtime will validate the following:

- There is exactly 1 entry defining the draw/dispatch parameters
    (either D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INSTANCED or
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INDEXED_INSTANCED or
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DISPATCH). This entry must come last.

- A D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_INDEX_BUFFER entry can only be
    present if there is also a
    D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DRAW_INDEXED_INSTANCED present.

- ByteStride is 4-byte aligned

- ByteStride is large enough to hold all data

- All resource bindings are compatible with the root signature.

- Each root parameter slot is defined no more than once

- Root parameter slots do not exceed range defined by root signature

- If there are index buffer changes, the index buffer format is valid

- If there are vertex buffer changes, the vb slot index is within the
    range allowed by D3D

- Entries that reference root parameter slots are sorted from smallest
    to largest root parameter index

- Root constant entries are sorted from smallest to largest
    DestOffsetIn32BitValues (including no overlap)

- If D3D12_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT_TYPE_DISPATCH is used, then VB and IB
    bindings cannot be changed

- The root signature is specified if and only if the command signature
    indicates that 1 of the root arguments changes

- For root constants DestOffsetIn32BitValues + Num32BitValuesToSet is
    within range defined by the root signature

- No VB slot is changed more than once

- Only 1 IB change per command signature is allowed

- Num32BitValuesToSet must be greater than 0

- ByteStride must be a multiple of 4 bytes

---

# Drawing

Applications perform indirect draws/dispatches via the following API:

```C++
void ID3D12CommandList::ExecuteIndirect(
    ID3D12CommandSignature* pCommandSignature,
    UINT MaxCommandCount,
    ID3D12Resource* pArgumentBuffer,
    UINT64 ArgumentBufferOffset,
    ID3D12Resource* pCountBuffer,
    UINT64 CountBufferOffset
);
```

There are 2 ways that command counts can be specified:

If pCountBuffer is not NULL, then MaxCommandCount specifies the maximum
number of operations which will be performed. The actual number of
operations to be performed are defined by the minimum of this value, and
a 32-bit unsigned integer contained in pCountBuffer (at the byte offset
specified by CountBufferOffset).

If pCounterBuffer is NULL, the MaxCommandCount specifies the exact
number of operations which will be performed.

The semantics of this API are defined with the following pseudo-code:

Non-NULL pCountBuffer:

```C++
// Read draw count out of count buffer
UINT CommandCount = pCountBuffer->ReadUINT32(CountBufferOffset);
CommandCount = min(CommandCount, MaxCommandCount)

// Get pointer to first Commanding argument
BYTE* Arguments = pArgumentBuffer->GetBase() + ArgumentBufferOffset;

for(UINT CommandIndex = 0; CommandIndex < CommandCount; CommandIndex++)
{
    // Interpret the data contained in *Arguments
    // according to the command signature
    pCommandSignature->Interpret(Arguments);
    Arguments += pCommandSignature ->GetByteStride();
}

NULL pCountBuffer:

// Get pointer to first Commanding argument
BYTE* Arguments = pArgumentBuffer->GetBase() + ArgumentBufferOffset;

for(UINT CommandIndex = 0; CommandIndex < MaxCommandCount;CommandIndex++)
{
  // Interpret the data contained in *Arguments
  // according to the command signature
  pCommandSignature->Interpret(Arguments);
  Arguments += pCommandSignature ->GetByteStride();
}
```

The debug layer will issue an error if either the count buffer or the
argument buffer are not in the D3D12_RESOURCE_USAGE_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT state.

The core runtime will validate:

- CountBufferOffset and ArgumentBufferOffset are 4-byte aligned

- pCountBuffer and pArgumentBuffer are buffer resources (any heap
    type)

- The offset implied by MaxCommandCount, ArgumentBufferOffset, and the
    drawing program stride do not exceed the bounds of pArgumentBuffer
    (similarly for count buffer)

- The command list is a direct command list or a compute command list
    (not a copy or JPEG decode command list)

The debug layer will validate:

- The root signature of the command list matches the root signature of
    the command signature

ID3D12CommandList::DrawInstancedIndirect and
ID3D12CommandList::DrawIndexedInstancedIndirect are removed from the
D3D12 API because they can be implemented with the features described
here.

---

# Bundles

ID3D12CommandList::ExecuteIndirect is allowed inside of bundle command
lists only if all of the following are true:

1. CountBuffer is NULL (CPU-specified count only)

2. The command signature contains exactly 1 operation. This implies
    that the command signature does not contain root arguments changes,
    nor contain VB/IB binding changes.

---

# State leakage

ExecuteIndirect is defined to reset all bindings affected by the
ExecuteIndirect to known values. In particular.

- If the command signature binds a VB to a particular slot, then after
    ExecuteIndirect is called, a NULL VB is bound to that slot

- If the command signature binds an IB, then after ExecuteIndirect, a
    NULL IB is bound.

- If the command signature sets a root constant, then after
    ExecuteIndirect is called, the root constant value is set to 0

- If the command signature sets a root view (CBV/SRV/UAV), then after
    ExecuteIndirect is called, the root view is set to a NULL view.

This enables drivers to easily track bindings. This is implemented by
the D3D12 runtime by making a series of DDI calls after the
ExecuteIndirect is called.

---

# Obtaining buffer virtual addresses

A new API is added whereby an application can retrieve the GPU virtual
address of a buffer.

```C++
typedef UINT64 D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS;

D3D12_GPU_VIRTUAL_ADDRESS ID3D12Resource::GetGPUVirtualAddress();
```

Applications are free to apply byte offsets to virtual addresses before
placing them in an indirect argument buffer. Note that all of the D3D12
alignment requirements for VB/IB/CB still apply to the resulting GPU
virtual address.

This API returns 0's for non-buffer resources.

---

# Feature tiers

```C++
typedef enum D3D12_EXECUTE_INDIRECT_TIER
{
    D3D12_EXECUTE_INDIRECT_TIER_1_0 = 10,
    D3D12_EXECUTE_INDIRECT_TIER_1_1 = 11,
} D3D12_EXECUTE_INDIRECT_TIER;
```

All D3D12 devices support tier 1.0, which is the majority of this spec, and applications don't need to bother checking for this level of support.

Tier 1.1 adds support for [Incrementing constant](#incrementing-constant).  To use this, applications do need to ensure device support for tier 1.1, reported in `D3D12_FEATURE_D3D12_OPTIONS21`, via `CheckFeatureSupport()`.

---

# Implementation Details

Both of the following implementations are acceptable:

- Make the GPU command processor interpret the indirect argument
    buffer contents in the application-defined format

- Allocate enough storage in the current command buffer to hold
    MaxCommandCount draws. Execute a compute shader to transform from
    the application-specified format to a hardware-specific format in
    the allocated command buffer space.

Note that in the 2^nd^ approach, the hidden compute shader invocations
associated with many ExecuteIndirect calls can be combined together. If
a command list has no resource transition barrier to the
D3D12_RESOURCE_USAGE_INDIRECT_ARGUMENT state, then it is safe to
move all of the hidden compute shader invocations to the beginning of
the command list.

---

# GPU Validation

In order to achieve consistent behavior across machines, GPUs are
expected to perform the following validation:

1. The draw count specified in the indirect argument buffer is
    guaranteed to not exceed the MaxCommandCount specified in the
    ExecuteIndirect API call. This is achieved by having the GPU compute
    min(MaxCommandCount, CommandCount).

---

# Test Plan

---

## Runtime Functional Tests

- Validation during command signature creation √

- Validation during ExecuteIndirect √

- GetGPUVirtualAddress returns 0 for non-buffer resources √

- Debug layer validation of buffer states √

- Debug layer validation of buffer contents

- The runtime sets state to correct default values after
    ExecuteIndirect (also the runtime should correctly select compute vs
    graphics root arguments to change) √

- Debug layer validation of buffer alignments (taking into account the
    SRV/UAV format/structure byte stride).

- Indirect argument structures have no padding √

- ComandListAPITestBase::Execute is updated to call ExecuteIndirect √

- CommandListTest::InvalidBundleAPI √

- CommandListTest::SetCommandListError √

- CommandSignature object takes a reference on root signature object √

- Debug layer warning if a command signature is destroyed while there
    is outstanding work queued against it (like a PSO)

- Runtime validation in GetGPUVA √

- GetGPUVA works with placed resources √

- GetGPUVA works with reserved resources √

- CreateCommandSignature correctly handles the case where the first
    parameter changes a root argument (validation of increasing orders
    handles the first case). √

- Debug layer validation during ExecuteIndirect

- Debug layer validation of index buffer formats

- Debug layer validation of tiled constant buffers not being supported

- The runtime hard-coded array size of 64 constants is the correct
    size √

---

## Driver Conformance Tests

- Drivers work correctly when CountBuffer is NULL and when CountBuffer
    is non-NULL

- ExecuteIndirect works correctly inside of a bundle

- Applications can add byte offsets to GPU virtual addresses

- Arbitrary command signatures produce the same results as
    corresponding non-indirect rendering API calls

- Arbitrary 4-byte aligned byte strides are supported

- Indirect argument buffer & Count buffer can be in any heap type

- GPU computes min(MaxCommandCount, CommandCount)

- Drivers do not elide hidden shaders across
    ResourceBarrier(->INDIRECT_ARGS) state.

- Predication works correctly

- Queries work correctly

- GetGPUVA works with committed resources, placed resources, and
    reserved resources

- GetGPUVA works with opened shared resources

- CountBufferOffset & ArgumentBufferOffset are interpreted correctly

- When setting root constants, DestOffsetIn32BitValues and
    Num32BitValuesToSet are interpreted correctly

- Changing root arguments works with both compute and graphics

- Drivers correctly handle shader-visibility and deny flags when
    setting root arguments via ExecuteIndirect

- Out-of-bounds behavior correctly applies based on the app-specified
    buffer sizes (for CBV/SRV/UAV)

- ExecuteIndirect works on compute queues

- MaxCommandCount==0 works correctly

- Root SRVs and UAVs work with all supported formats

- Tiled root SRVs and UAVs work correctly (with offsets)

---

# Change log

|Date|Changes|
|---|---|
|10/12/2023|<ul><li>Added [Incrementing constant](#incrementing-constant), which ask the system to increment a specified root constant for each ExecuteIndirect command.</li><li>Added [Feature tiers](#feature-tiers) which has `D3D12_EXECUTE_INDIRECT_TIER_1_1` to report incrementing constant support.</li></ul> |
|12/9/2024|<ul><li>`D3D12_DISPATCH_MESH_ARGUMENTS` was missing.</li><li>Removed `D3D12_CONSTANT_BUFFER_VIEW` struct, which doesn't exist.</li></ul> |
